feat: support Vercel AI SDK 5 Beta (#189)
run-llama/chat-ui: docs/chat-ui/parts.mdx

---
title: Message Parts
description: Working with rich content parts for multimedia and interactive chat experiences
---

Message parts are the building blocks for creating rich, interactive chat experiences beyond simple text. They allow you to embed text, files, sources, events, artifacts, and custom content types directly into chat messages as structured components.

## Parts System Overview

Chat-UI supports two fundamental types of parts that make up chat messages:

### 1. Text Parts
Text parts contain markdown content that gets rendered as formatted text. They use the `text` type and are the primary way to display textual content.

### 2. Data Parts  
Data parts contain structured data for rich interactive components like weather widgets, file attachments, sources, and more.

> Both built-in and custom parts are both using the data- prefix because Vercel need `data-` prefix to detect data parts from events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both built-in and custom parts are both using the `data-` prefix. We're using here the convention from Vercel AI SDK 5 to use the `data-` prefix to detect data parts in messages.
```

```typescript
const WeatherPartType = 'data-weather'

interface WeatherData {
  location: string
  temperature: number
  condition: string
  humidity: number
  windSpeed: number
}
```

### 2. Create the Component

```tsx
import { usePart } from '@llamaindex/chat-ui'

export function WeatherPart() {
  // usePart returns data only if current part matches the type
  const weatherData = usePart<WeatherData>(WeatherPartType)
  
  if (!weatherData) return null
  
  return (
    <div className="weather-widget">
      <h3>{weatherData.location}</h3>
      <div className="temperature">{weatherData.temperature}°C</div>
      <div className="condition">{weatherData.condition}</div>
      <div className="details">
        <span>Humidity: {weatherData.humidity}%</span>
        <span>Wind: {weatherData.windSpeed} km/h</span>
      </div>
    </div>
  )
}
```

### 3. Add to Message Rendering

```tsx
<ChatMessage message={message}>
  <ChatMessage.Content>
    <ChatMessage.Part.Markdown />
    <ChatMessage.Part.File />
    {/* Add your custom component */}
    <WeatherPart />
  </ChatMessage.Content>
</ChatMessage>
```

## Adding Parts from Backend via SSE Protocol

> Parts are streamed using the **Server-Sent Events (SSE)** protocol, which provides real-time communication between the server and client. Here's how the streaming implementation works:

Reviewer: is there a link to the vercel data protocol, then we can say that we're using it and reference it here

        }
        
        // End text stream
        writeStream({ id: messageId, type: 'text-end' })
      }
      
      async function writeData(data: MessagePart) {
        writeStream({
          id: data.id,
          type: `data-${data.type}`,
          data: data.data
        })
      }
      
      // Stream all parts
      for (const item of parts) {
        if (typeof item === 'string') {
          await writeText(item)
        } else {
          await writeData(item)
        }
      }
      
      controller.close()
    },
  })
}
```

### Important ID Behavior for Data Parts

When data parts have the same `id`, only the **last** data part with that ID will exist in `message.parts`. This is useful for:

- **Single data display**: Show only the final result (e.g., hide loading, show final weather data)
- **Progressive updates**: Update the same component as new data arrives (e.g., streaming events)

If you want multiple parts of the same type, **don't provide an ID** or use different IDs.

Example:

1. When calling a tool, send an event with tool call information:

```typescript
part1 = {
  id: 'demo_sample_event_id',

>   type: 'event',

Reviewer: data- prefix?

  data: {
    title: 'Calling tool `get_weather` with input `San Francisco, CA`',
    status: 'pending',
  },
}
```

2. When the tool call is completed, send an event with the tool call result. The previous event with the same id will be replaced by the new one.

```typescript
part2 = {
  id: 'demo_sample_event_id',
  type: 'event',
  data: {
    title: 'Calling tool `get_weather` with input `San Francisco, CA`',
    status: 'pending',
  },
}
```

When checking `message.parts`, you will only see the last event with the final result.

### Important Notes

- **SSE Format**: Each message must be prefixed with `data: ` and end with `\n\n`
- **JSON Encoding**: All chunks are JSON-encoded objects

> - **Text Streaming**: Text content requires start/delta/end sequence for proper rendering

Reviewer: >requires start/delta/end sequence
don't understand that

Reviewer: isn't it just:
```
{
      type: 'text',
      text: 'I\'ve analyzed your data and here are the results:'
    }
```
?
